---
title: "Machine learning: classification"
published: true
morea_id: experience-axioms-prob-ai
morea_type: experience
morea_summary: "Problems in class"
morea_start_date: "2023-09-01"
morea_labels:
---

AI and Machine learning approaches almost always have a probabilistic
setup. We consider what is called a classification problem. In the
real line, imagine that a threshold (a number $$T$$) splits the line
into two (infinite length) intervals. Each side of $$T$$ carries a
different _label_, the left side of $$T$$ carrying label -1 and the
right side carrying label +1. The threshold $$T$$ is unknown (but
fixed) to the _learning algorithm_, and the algorithm is supposed to
figure this out.
	
There is a pdf $$f$$ on real numbers. A training point is a real
number $$x$$ generated by the distribution $$f$$. Once we generate the
training point, an oracle that knows $$T$$ gives us its correct label.
	
Our learning algorithm takes this training point $$x$$ and its label,
and uses it to output a hypothesis (its best guess of what the unknown
threshold is). The learning algorithm will then use its estimate of
the threshold to classify a _test_ point $$x'$$, potentially
different, but also generated by the same probability law as the
training point. 

	
For this problem, consider the following algorithm: If the label of
the training point $$x$$ is -1, the algorithm outputs as its estimate
of the threshold to be $$x+\frac12$$, labeling the left interval to be
-1 and right to be +1.  If the label of the training point $$x$$ is
+1, the algorithm outputs $$x-\frac12$$, again labeling the left
interval to be -1 and right to be +1.

Since the algorithm does not know $$T$$, it will classify test points
generated by $$f$$ using its estimate of the threshold instead. There
may therefore be some combinations of training and test samples ($$x$$
and $$x'$$ respectively) where the true label of the test sample (set
by $$T$$) and its estimated label (set by the algorithm's estimate of
the threshold) differ.  Then we say that the algorithm trained on
$$x$$ _misclassifies_ the test point $$x'$$.
	
Model the problem, identify the misclassification event: ie all
combinations of training $$x$$ and test sample $$x'$$ such that the
algorithm trained on $$x$$ misclassifies $$x'$$. The probability of
misclassification (which we will examine later) is related to
something the _generalization_ error, the ability of the algorithm
to handle test samples potentially different from the training samples.
